---
title: Opening Again
description: >
   When it comes to spiritual practices, "try again" might be the wrong way
   to think about our disappointments.
category: spiritual life
tags: [prayer, spiritual discipline]
---

Dear friend,

Thank you so much for sharing about your desires and disappointments with
respect to being attentive to God's presence while at work.  Your
reflections reminded me of my own wrestling with being present to God in
prayer.  I almost shared some reflections along those lines when we spoke,
but I thought they might take too long to explain, so I held back, but I'd
love to share them with you now, in case they are at all helpful or
encouraging.

A couple of months ago during church, I had one ear on the sermon and one
ear on my inward thoughts.  I was reflecting on the fact that I had gotten
off track in my practice of prayer, yet again.  "I guess I'll just have to
_try again_ this week," I thought.  And then, just as the thought ran
through my head, it struck me that the very phrase "try again" was
problematic for several reasons.  First, the phrase emphasizes our _failure_
(you only try _again_ if you tried before and didn't succeed).  But, if
there is no condemnation in Jesus, it probably is less helpful to dwell on
our failures than to focus on the strength we gain by being allied with him. 

Second, the phrase emphasizes our _effort_ ("_try_ again").  But, the New
Testament seems to suggest that our faith and virtue and good works that we
do are all _gifts_ from God.  Trying to muster them on our own through sheer
will is likely to be a failure from the start.  It seems likely better to
approach our desires for greater devotion from the perspective of a request
to our loving Father who wants to give us such good gifts.

Prayer isn't something you finish—each opportunity is new.
{: .callout}

Finally, the phrase suggests that prayer (or other spiritual acts) are
something you _achieve_ and then are done ("if at first you don't succeed,
try, try, try again" until you do and then can stop).  But, prayer isn't
something we ever _finish._ We have a new opportunity every morning, each
moment, to approach God again and anew, irrespective of whether we have
failed 100 times before or are continuing a 100-time winning streak.  Each
opportunity is new.  It's like eating breakfast—each day is a new chance to
have breakfast, and you shouldn't necessarily think about today's breakfast
in light of all the breakfasts you have (or haven't) had before.

In his book _[Opening to God](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9510022),_
David Benner suggests that prayer is the practice of opening oneself to God. 
Benner emphasizes that the outcome and experience of prayer is a gift from
God, and while we should expect that God shows up, Benner cautions against
having any particular expectation about how that should look or what the
experience will feel like.  Along those lines, Benner also says we shouldn't
be too worried about "doing it right" or troubled by our feeble
abilities—God wants to meet us _where we are,_ and growth in those abilities
is a gift from him.  Our responsibility is merely to open ourselves to the
extent of our current capacity, to wait for God, and to be thankful for
however he chooses to act in any given moment.  I found Benner's book to be
quite encouraging and drew from it a new phrase to frame my practice of
prayer: _"opening again."_ I wish I could say I've had a deep and fervent
practice of prayer in the couple of months since these reflections.  I
_haven't._ But, I still desire to meet each new day by accepting God's
invitation to open myself again to him.  By God's grace, perhaps I'll
receive the gift of growing in this capacity.  I pray the same for you in
your desire to be present with God while at work.

I so very much appreciated talking with you about how you came to join our
church and your experience buying your house.  It's a privilege and a
delight to have the opportunity to know you and your family.  I'm looking
forward to more conversations and knowing you all better.
